Coughlin's first head coaching job was at the Rochester Institute of Technology from 1970–1973. He then returned to his alma mater where he was eventually promoted to offensive coordinator, a position he also held at Boston College where he coached Doug Flutie. He returned to the staff after his stint at the Rochester Institute of Technology. Coughlin's second stint started in 1974, and ended in 1980. He left the collegiate level to become a wide receivers coach in the NFL for the Philadelphia Eagles, and later the Green Bay Packers and New York Giants.

While at New York, he was an assistant to Bill Parcells, and helped the Giants win Super Bowl XXV. Coughlin and Parcells have both made the NFL playoffs five times as Giants head coach, and the two Super Bowl titles they each have won with the Giants have occurred in their fourth and eighth seasons with the franchise, respectively.[2]

##Boston College

After the 1990 season, Coughlin returned to Boston College to take on his second job as a head coach. In three seasons at Boston College, he turned the program into a consistent winner. Coughlin's tenure was capped with a 41–39 victory over \#1 ranked Notre Dame in 1993, the first time Boston College defeated Notre Dame.

### Jacksonville Jaguars

Coughlin's success at Boston College led to his subsequent hiring as the first head coach of the NFL's expansion Jacksonville Jaguars. In eight seasons at Jacksonville, he helmed the most successful expansion team in league history. During Coughlin's tenure, the Jaguars made four consecutive playoff appearances and went to the AFC Championship Game twice. The first time, in only the second year of the team's existence (1996), the Jaguars qualified for the playoffs on the last day of the season and upset the heavily-favored Buffalo Bills and Denver Broncos on the road. He was named NFL Coach of the Year by United Press International. Coughlin would again take the Jaguars to the AFC Championship Game in 1999 after achieving a league-high 14–2 regular season record; the 14 wins stood as the most won by the current wave of expansion teams (the Jaguars, Carolina Panthers, Baltimore Ravens and Houston Texans) until the Panthers surpassed it in 2015. However, in both appearances in the championship game, the Jaguars were defeated: in 1996 by the New England Patriots, and in 1999, by the Tennessee Titans.

Coughlin's Jaguars won 49 regular season games in his first five years as head coach, a remarkable average[according to whom?] for an expansion team of nearly ten wins per year. But the Jaguars' record for the next three years was only 19–29, and after a 6–10 finish in 2002, Coughlin was fired by owner Wayne Weaver. He finished his eight-year career in Jacksonville with a 68–60 regular season record and a 4–4 playoff record.

In 2011 (after selling the Jaguars to Shahid Khan) Weaver said when looking back on his tenure as owner, one of his biggest regrets was firing Coughlin.[3]

### New York Giants

After being out of football in 2003, Coughlin was hired to replace Jim Fassel as head coach of the New York Giants in January 2004. He inherited a team that finished 4–12 in 2003.

As Coughlin took over, the Giants were trying to put together a trade for the first pick in the draft. That year, the San Diego Chargers held that pick, and the expected selection was Mississippi quarterback Eli Manning, who had made his desire clear that he wanted to play for the Giants. On draft day the Giants drafted NC State's Philip Rivers with the fourth pick and traded him to the Chargers for Manning. Coughlin's incumbent quarterback, Kerry Collins, was incensed by the move and demanded his release, leaving the team without a veteran who could hold the fort until Manning was ready. To fill that role the Giants signed Kurt Warner, the former Super Bowl MVP who had been cut by the St. Louis Rams after he lost his starting job to Marc Bulger.

Behind Warner, Coughlin led the Giants to five wins in their first seven games. However, with the team having lost their next two, Coughlin decided that Warner, who had been struggling, could no longer do the job and began starting the highly touted Manning beginning in the tenth game. The coach received criticism from some who felt the move amounted to a surrender of the 2004 season, as their 5–4 record meant the Giants were still in playoff contention. Manning did in fact struggle and the Giants' losing streak reached eight games before Manning defeated the Dallas Cowboys in the final game of the season.

Another major impact Coughlin would have on the Giants was star running back Tiki Barber's fumbling problems. In the 2000–2004 seasons, Barber lost the ball 19 times. By simply teaching Barber to use a different grip on the ball, Coughlin reduced Barber's fumbles to only one in the 2005 season. Barber also saw his production increase significantly, setting career highs in rushing and total yards each year under Coughlin.

Coughlin's early move to Manning, though, would pay dividends in 2005, as Manning and the Giants went 11–5 in Coughlin's second season and won the NFC East for the first time since 2000. It was also the Giants' first postseason appearance since making it as a wild card in 2002. However, a very poor performance by Manning, and a defense missing three starting linebackers, saw the Giants get shut out 23–0 at the hands of the Carolina Panthers at Giants Stadium. Following the game, Tiki Barber called out Coughlin and his offensive coordinator, partially because a Panthers player said that "We knew what they were going to do before they did it." Coughlin and Barber have yet to reconcile their differences, with Coughlin even refusing an interview by Tiki, then a sideline reporter for NBC, which would have been held prior to a Panthers-Giants game in 2008.[4]
